Israel's Relentless bombardment has
forced gaza's healthc care system to the
brink of collapse more than
77,500 people have been injured since
the onset of the military campaign in
October only six of the strip's 36
hospitals are functioning and only
partially the health Ministry has
recorded a million cases of infectious
diseases and more than a quarter of
gaza's 2.3 million residents are on the
brink of famine UNICEF estimates that a
northern AA one in three children
younger than two is malnourished we have
with us uh James Smith who's a British
doctor who traveled to Gaza with Med
medical aid for Palestinians between
December 2023 and January 2024 joining
us from London welcome to Al jazer we
appreciate your time if we start with
the latest developments uh look there
was a recent attack in central Gaza just
a few hours ago uh we're hearing that uh
36 people were killed because of
bombardment on Family Home and these
people the dead and the injured have
been taken to AA hospital and that is
where you worked I understand uh during
the months that you were in Gaza from
what you've seen is Al AA Hospital able
to cope with bringing in more injured
people H how is the hospital
dealing I mean I think what we need to
remember is is that the the health
system collapsed in Gaza back in uh late
October of
2023 um and it hasn't recovered since
and and and that's because the the
supplies the
resources um the the specialist Staffing
and so on required um have either not
entered into Gaza or where or where such
sort of Commodities and resources have
been made available um it's impossible
for people to work um in a context of
such extreme violence and
insecurity um the hospital is barely
able to cope I I heard from a colleague
yesterday who wrote a very short message
to and he simply said the situation is
catastrophic um they have very very
limited means to provide care to
patients uh and patients are presenting
with some of the most horrific trauma
related injuries uh and also non-trauma
related Health Care problems that I have
ever seen like like what I wonder if you
can just elaborate on what you
saw so we would see children and adults
on a on a daily basis often multiple
times a day with um severe multi-trauma
related injuries um often children with
um traumatic amputations of of more than
one limb um children and adults with
horrific full thickness Burns um all of
these um trauma related injuries require
prolonged Specialist Care which simply
isn't available um at the current time
at the same time we were seeing hundred
hundreds of children presenting to the
pediatric department every day this was
back in early January um children with
diarrheal illnesses uh complex
respiratory problems um all sorts of
conditions that again require um
immediate medical
intervention and whilst you were there
um what sort of Aid did you see coming
to AA hospital and perhaps other areas
of the Gaza Strip and you mentioned a
moment ago that that you were in touch
with a colleague just yesterday from
from Gaza are they telling you about
what sort of Aid is now coming into the
Gaza
Strip so I haven't heard this from from
colleagues directly but but certainly
during my brief time in Gaza um Aid was
was um minimal at best um as as viewers
will know there hasn't been a day since
October 7th that we've come anywhere
near the requisite 500 trucks of
humanitarian Aid need has increased so
exponentially in that time that we're
talking about thousands and thousands of
trucks that are required on a on a sing
on a single day uh to bring in clean
water nutritious food Essential Medical
Supplies uh shelter and so on um we saw
trucks parked up in Rafa for the better
part of a sort of half kilometer to a
kilometer um unable to to Cross or
waiting to cross um and on occasion we
would see very very small convoys of of
of trucks moving from the south towards
the north of Gaza it wasn't clear where
they were going but um it was clear that
the volume of of of humanitarian
assistance they were were were carrying
was negligible at best and in terms of I
mean you know we speak to people over
and over again from the Gaza Strip and
and and doctors like yourselves who who
just say that hospitals need absolutely
everything at this point but but from
what you saw what's most desperately
needed for the hospitals to be able to
to
function what's most desperately needed
first and foremost is an is an end to
the violence and and Healthcare and
humanitarian workers have been
consistent about this from the outset uh
that there's a saying that that that
that that was particularly prominent
during the Rwandan
Genocide um which goes that doctors
cannot
stop a genocide um so you can resource a
health system um to to to a state of
almost Perfection but but but you cannot
um adequately respond to the needs uh of
the people under these current
conditions um we have healthc care
workers um Palestinian healthcare
workers that have been working under
these conditions for more than five
months now they are completely exhausted
many of them are profoundly traumatized
they're also trying to look after their
families at the same time um we need
additional U medical support we need um
staff to to work alongside them and to
be directed by them we need essential
Commodities at times we're talking about
the absolute Basics um surgical gors to
clean and and and pack wounds um simple
analgesia to treat pain um we as as
you've mentioned we're talking about
absolutely everything that is needed at
the moment uh in order to maintain the
most basic level of of functionality and
and let me just ask you one final
question while I have you with us um
James Smith I mean we see now uh the the
Us and other countries uh sending Aid by
sea building that Pier off the coast of
Gaza we've seen these air drops that
have taking place do you think that they
replace the need for access to Gaza by
Road and what's your reaction uh to
these
moves no they absolutely don't replace
the need for for Access via Road this is
a perverse distraction and and no
humanitarian organization should play
into this we're talking about
effectively a humanitarian Alibi whereby
ongoing um political uh uh neglect
ongoing military violence is disguised
with uh the the the sort of the bare
minimum of of of humanitarian support um
it's it's it's not even worth discussing
this and and and and really we need to
be pushing one for an end to the
violence and two for um the the the most
significant surge of of humanitarian
support uh by land into Rafa uh and and
Via other means um as soon as as as is
possible okay uh James Smith we thank
you so much for joining us from London
and giving us your perspective thank you